---
layout: post
img: /images/blursed.png
title: Slay the Spire as a mental model for software development
published: false
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

**Note**: All models are wrong, [but some are useful](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All_models_are_wrong)

About a year ago I picked up a copy of [Before We Go Live](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/63389747-before-we-go-live)
by [jorbs](https://www.youtube.com/@Jorbs), a professional poker player turned
[Slay the Spire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slay_the_Spire) streamer known for his
deadpan humor and extremely calculated playstyle. I half expected it to be a Machiavellian aesop
about how to apply rationality and deck-builder strategy to day-to-day life in the same vein as
[Sam Bankman Fried's betting games at Jane Street](https://archive.ph/JLwuQ).
Instead, it was a down-to-earth, insightful, empathetic, and telling exposé on
prejudice and corruption in the world of video game streaming that I highly recommend to anyone
interested in a behind the scenes look at the industry.

<!--more-->

While I thoroughly enjoyed the book, I still sort of wanted to see what the hyperrational game-addict version
would have looked like. After all, there's no shortage of lifehack-esque writeups extolling
the virtues of why playing a specific game will transform the way you live your life:

* [Chess Teaches the Power of Sacrifice](https://archive.is/K27RG)
* [Forget chess, backgammon teaches the most valuable life lessons: blind luck and wild unfairness](https://archive.is/hHQCB)
* [Teach your kids poker, not chess](https://momentofdeep.substack.com/p/teach-your-kids-poker-not-chess)
* [Teach your kids bridge, not poker](https://specbranch.com/posts/teach-bridge/)
* [Factorio Is The Best Technical Interview We Have](https://erikmcclure.com/blog/factorio-is-best-interview-we-have/)

Anyway, in the spirit of being the change I want to see in the world:

# Why every software developer should play Slay the Spire

[] Combat image

Slay the Spire is a [roguelike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roguelike) deck-building game
similar to games like Dominion, Balatro, and Hearthstone. You play as an adventurer whose
ultimate goal is, as you might guess, to slay the Spire: a massive tower filled with
deadly enemies. The main gameplay loop consists of rounds of combat where you take turns drawing and
playing the cards in your deck to damage enemies and defend yourself from incoming attacks.

## Cards and features

[] Card reward

The main way to grow stronger during a playthrough is by defeating enemies and adding new
cards to your deck. Whenever an enemy is defeated, the game offers you a choice
from three randomly selected cards for you to add to your deck. To kick off our shaky
software development analogy, you can think of card rewards as new features that we have
the option to add after encountering users. Although its tempting for new players to
add new cards at every opportunity, this is often a trap for a few different reasons.

### Adding is easy, upgrading is hard, removing is harder

*Everyone wants to build but no one wants to maintain* - KV

In addition to adding cards, there are various opportunities to upgrade or remove cards
from your deck as you climb the Spire. Removing a card is fairly self explanatory, while
upgrading generally makes existing cards stronger or more useful in combat.

[]pommel and pommel+


A typical run of Slay the Spire offers the player ~40 opportunities to add a card,
~10 opportunities to upgrade existing cards, and ~5 opportunities to remove cards.

In the world of software development, upgrades are
- idk something about upgrading software in large orgs
- deprecating shit also takes effort

New players are often tempted to add new cards to their deck at every opportunity since
they are almost always better than the initial ~10 basic cards that each run begins with.
* Adding too many cards early
In many cases the best option at a card reward is to forgo taking any card.

* adding too many cards early short term leads to bloat
    * Limited opportunities to upgrade existing cards, weaker cards plague the deck
    * It's much harder to remove cards than to add them
    * Pre-emptively building features
    * Bad cards can become a curse


### Building for an archtye

## There are no hard rules

## Survivorship bias

Every playthrough of Slay the Spire starts with a brief conversation with Neow, an angel investor of sorts.
The sparse lore of the game implies that Neow is some sort of eldritch
god imprisoned beneath the Spire for tampering with the balance of life and death, but
it's rude to look a gift horse in the mouth. At the start of each run she gifts the player
seed capital in the form of some gold, the resurrected corpse of a fallen adventurer, and
a basic deck of cards. Occasionally she'll mumble something about risk vs. reward before
sending you up the Spire to disrupt the status quo.

[] Neow

Your journey up the spire is divided into "acts", where each act comes with its own pool
of enemies, rewards, and events that the game randomly chooses for you to encounter.

Points I actually feel like making:
* Architect vs. developer <=> Meta gameplay vs. core game play
* Dead draws are tech debt
* Pivoting? Adaptability? Early its dangerous to try to build into an archetype
* You need to fight enemies

<!--

-->
